.. SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2026 NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Retargeters: SO-101 (5-DOF arm)
===============================

The SO-101 is a low-cost 5-DOF arm with a single-jaw gripper. Its task-space IK is
**position-only** -- a 5-DOF arm cannot track a full 6-DOF end-effector pose -- so the standard
:class:`~isaacteleop.retargeters.Se3AbsRetargeter` + :class:`~isaacteleop.retargeters.GripperRetargeter`
pairing does not fit. These three retargeters provide the missing pieces for comfortable XR
controller teleoperation of the arm (used by the Isaac Lab ``Isaac-Stack-Cube-SO101-IK-Abs-v0``
cube-stacking task):

* :class:`~isaacteleop.retargeters.SO101ClutchRetargeter` -- absolute EE **position** with
  clutch-style rebasing (no teleport on engage).
* :class:`~isaacteleop.retargeters.SO101RollRetargeter` -- recovers the controller's roll as a
  dedicated ``wrist_roll`` joint channel that position-only IK would otherwise drop.
* :class:`~isaacteleop.retargeters.SO101GripperRetargeter` -- proportional (analog) jaw
  closedness from the controller trigger.

Together they flatten (via :class:`~isaacteleop.retargeters.TensorReorderer`) into a 5-D action
``[pos_x, pos_y, pos_z, roll, gripper]``.

At a glance
-----------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 28 22 50

   * - Retargeter
     - Output
     - What it does
   * - ``SO101ClutchRetargeter``
     - 7-D ``ee_pose`` (xyz + xyzw quat)
     - Same output contract as ``Se3AbsRetargeter``, but rebases controller motion around an
       origin captured on engage: ``pos = home + scale * R_base_from_world @ (p_ctrl - p0)``.
       The quaternion is a passthrough and is dropped downstream.
   * - ``SO101RollRetargeter``
     - 1 float ``roll_command`` [rad]
     - Absolute swing-twist twist of the grip about fixed world Z, driving ``wrist_roll``.
   * - ``SO101GripperRetargeter``
     - 1 float ``gripper_command`` ``c`` in ``[0, 1]``
     - Trigger -> jaw closedness (``0`` = open, ``1`` = closed), with a released-end deadzone.

Why a clutch
------------

``Se3AbsRetargeter`` maps the controller's absolute position straight to the EE target, so
engaging teleop teleports the arm to wherever the controller happens to be. The clutch instead
**re-arms** whenever teleop is not ``RUNNING`` and latches a controller origin ``p0`` on the
first ``RUNNING`` frame (the headset "Play"). From then on the EE is driven by the *delta*
relative to ``p0``, so engaging with a steady controller does not move the arm. On the latching
frame ``p_ctrl == p0``, so the emitted position is exactly the home (no jump). The last pose is
held on a dropped frame.

The clutch keeps position-control IK (``use_relative_mode=False``): it emits an **absolute**
target, just rebased.

Frames and the live-EE home
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The controller delta ``(p_ctrl - p0)`` is in the (anchor-transformed) **world** frame, while the
IK position command is in the robot **base** frame. When the base is not aligned with the world
frame (e.g. a seated, yawed base) the world-frame delta is rotated into the base frame before
being added to the home. The base placement is **not** hardcoded: the retargeter learns it at
runtime from the optional ``robot_base_pos`` input (the live ``world_T_base`` 4x4 transform,
supplied by the Isaac Lab ``IsaacTeleopDevice`` from its ``base_frame_prim_path``), latched on
engage. When that input is absent the base frame defaults to **identity** -- world and base
coincide and the delta is applied unrotated.

The ``home`` itself is latched on engage:

* If the optional ``robot_ee_pos`` input (the live ``world_T_ee`` 4x4 transform, supplied by the
  Isaac Lab ``IsaacTeleopDevice`` from its ``ee_frame_prim_path``) is connected, the home is the
  robot's **current** end-effector position converted into the latched base frame -- so the arm
  stays put on engage.
* Otherwise it falls back to a fixed constant approximating the EE at the init joint pose.

.. note::

   The fallback home and the sign/scale knobs carry ``TODO(verify-in-sim)`` markers: the rebasing
   math is exact and unit-tested, but the end-to-end controller->EE handedness should be confirmed
   in simulation. Because the base placement now arrives at runtime via ``robot_base_pos``, this
   library no longer embeds any specific task's robot seat pose.

Wrist roll
----------

Because position-only IK drops the controller's orientation, ``SO101RollRetargeter`` recovers
just the **roll** as a separate joint channel. It takes the swing-twist twist angle of the grip
orientation about fixed world Z via quaternion projection (``2 * atan2(d, w)``), which stays
well-conditioned near a 180-degree rotation where Euler/rotvec extraction is unstable.

The twist responsiveness is exact and pose-independent, but the absolute zero absorbs the
controller's world *yaw* -- acceptable for the seated, forward-facing stacking setup. Switching
the twist axis to the grip body Z is the fix if yaw leak becomes objectionable.

Gripper
-------

``SO101GripperRetargeter`` maps the analog trigger to a jaw **closedness** ``c`` in ``[0, 1]``
(``0`` = open, ``1`` = closed) with a small released-end deadzone, so a half-pressed trigger
leaves the jaw half-closed. Downstream, an order-locked ``JointPositionActionCfg`` applies the
affine ``joint = offset + scale * c`` mapping ``c`` onto the open/close joint angles. This is
deliberately independent of the shared :class:`~isaacteleop.retargeters.GripperRetargeter`'s
binary ``+1 = open`` / ``-1 = closed`` sign.

Use it from Python
------------------

.. code-block:: python

   from isaacteleop.retargeters import (
       SO101ClutchRetargeter,
       SO101GripperRetargeter,
       SO101RollRetargeter,
       TensorReorderer,
   )
   from isaacteleop.retargeting_engine.deviceio_source_nodes import ControllersSource
   from isaacteleop.retargeting_engine.interface import OutputCombiner, ValueInput
   from isaacteleop.retargeting_engine.tensor_types import TransformMatrix

   def build_so101_stack_pipeline():
       controllers = ControllersSource(name="controllers")
       world_T_anchor = ValueInput("world_T_anchor", TransformMatrix())
       ee_pos = ValueInput(SO101ClutchRetargeter.ROBOT_EE_POS_INPUT, TransformMatrix())
       base_pos = ValueInput(SO101ClutchRetargeter.ROBOT_BASE_POS_INPUT, TransformMatrix())
       xformed = controllers.transformed(world_T_anchor.output(ValueInput.VALUE))

       clutch = SO101ClutchRetargeter(name="ee_pose", input_device=ControllersSource.RIGHT)
       connected_clutch = clutch.connect({
           ControllersSource.RIGHT: xformed.output(ControllersSource.RIGHT),
           SO101ClutchRetargeter.ROBOT_EE_POS_INPUT: ee_pos.output(ValueInput.VALUE),
           SO101ClutchRetargeter.ROBOT_BASE_POS_INPUT: base_pos.output(ValueInput.VALUE),
       })

       roll = SO101RollRetargeter(name="roll", input_device=ControllersSource.RIGHT)
       connected_roll = roll.connect(
           {ControllersSource.RIGHT: xformed.output(ControllersSource.RIGHT)}
       )

       gripper = SO101GripperRetargeter(name="gripper", input_device=ControllersSource.RIGHT)
       connected_gripper = gripper.connect(
           {ControllersSource.RIGHT: xformed.output(ControllersSource.RIGHT)}
       )

       # Keep all 7 pose names in input_config (must match the retargeter's (7,) output), but
       # drop the quaternion by listing only xyz + roll + gripper in output_order.
       ee_elements = ["pos_x", "pos_y", "pos_z", "quat_x", "quat_y", "quat_z", "quat_w"]
       reorderer = TensorReorderer(
           input_config={
               "ee_pose": ee_elements,
               "roll_command": ["roll_value"],
               "gripper_command": ["gripper_value"],
           },
           output_order=["pos_x", "pos_y", "pos_z", "roll_value", "gripper_value"],
           name="action_reorderer",
           input_types={"ee_pose": "array", "roll_command": "scalar", "gripper_command": "scalar"},
       )
       connected = reorderer.connect({
           "ee_pose": connected_clutch.output("ee_pose"),
           "roll_command": connected_roll.output("roll_command"),
           "gripper_command": connected_gripper.output("gripper_command"),
       })
       return OutputCombiner({"action": connected.output("output")})

See :ref:`isaac-teleop-pipeline-builder` for the general pipeline-builder pattern and
:doc:`index` for the full retargeting interface.

Validate
--------

The retargeters ship with sim-free unit tests (trigger/roll/clutch math plus per-frame
``compute`` behavior):

.. code-block:: console

   $ ctest --test-dir build -R retargeting_test_so101_retargeters --output-on-failure
